---
layout: page
---

### On Economic Inequality In America

My biggest concern--indeed, my biggest point of concentration outside of work--is learning the science, history, and nuances of our national and global economies and how we go about fixing the phenomenon of economic inequality. In most political conversations it seems we already have the solution to the ever-widening chasm of inequality figured out, due in no small part to the ever-resonant chanting of our social media brethren. There appears to be a canonical system when it comes to discussing the topic of economic inequality; in plain terms, it seems every piece of literature we stumble across has one or more of the following three ingredients as its base: political biases, high-level data (focusing solely on macro-level statistics), or poor understanding.

What do we do about economic inequality? To me, the rational first step needs to be understanding the problem. Yes, America has a growing divide of economic inequality; the upper deciles of society are growing ever richer, and the lowest deciles are stagnating (and have been for some time). Secondly, we need to explore how these changes came about; nobody ought to be content with blaming the wealthy and moving on--it's ignorant and harmful to more tangible discussions.

Certainly, the notion of the ultra-rich is a recognized attribute of American culture--we reward those who create wealth with a system that pays accordingly. Is that, in itself, a bad thing? My answer is no. I'm willing to guess your answer is the same. Those who work with levels of raw determination many magnitudes above our societal median ought to be rewarded for their work--it's a farce to say otherwise. So, then, what remains the issue?

Is the problem that the wealthy are sucking up more of the available pool of monetary resources available to the rest of us? It may have certainly seemed that way when we were in grade school. When Mom had only $10 of chore money to disperse between siblings depending on job performance, the very core of your financial livelihood was threatened; sit on your haunches, and little sister will swoop in and gobble up all the available capital in the system, leaving you in financial catastrophe.

As economically-inclined adults, we know that phenomenon doesn't exist outside of childhood. Those who create wealth don't slurp from a static pool of resources--their work expands the size of the pool. When a blacksmith creates 10 wheelbarrow frames to his competitor's 3 frames, the former isn't stealing 7 frames from the latter--it's a positive sum in its entirety. Today's typical political discussion conveys that the system of wealth creation is also the very system that destroys wealth--a self-referentially incoherent argument that holds no water.

Indeed, a conversation about the mid-20th century could focus on scenarios like the aforementioned. Before the rise of technology like we know it today, large corporations created wealth with units of input which yielded far less marginal output. Namely, humans doing work. The advent of modern technology has given a multiplicative sword to all those who choose to wield it. Technology has allowed the fiercely determined to accomplish with a few cloud-based servers, some several thousand lines of code, and negligible human capital, what previous generations' wealth producers could have only dreamt. Old companies spent their time optimizing around economies of scale; new companies have maximum economies of scale, right out of the box. Old companies relied on post-war oligopolistic alignment of government and its associated expenditures; new companies are innumerable, with near-infinite reach. Mid-20th century society didn't have narrow variations in economic inequality because of any tax policies Washington enforced; the combination of static wage levels set by the National War Labor Board, the advent of large, vertically-stacked, oligopolistic companies, and Lyndon B. Johnson's Federal Reserve policies of "Economic Utopia" (see: controlled economic expansion) all played far more of a part than any tax one could enforce on Bill Gates' portfolio.

So, how do we go about solving economic inequality once and for all?

My answer is simple: we don't.

Fostering America's spirit of innovation isn't something we ought to ever attempt to put a ceiling on. Simply taxing from the top--instead of building from the bottom--will create negligible societal benefit at best, and will snuff the flame of innovation at worst.

Surely I'm not saying we ought to stand idly by and watch as America deteriorates in to the "haves" and "have nots", am I? Certainly not. But what I am saying is that by treating economic inequality as the ailment instead of a product of certain environments run amuck is to confuse a collapsed home as the problem, and ignoring the cracked foundation underneath the rubble.

So instead, let's address the cracking foundation. The most glaring underlying issue America faces in the conversation around economic inequality is that of poverty. In his essay entitled, "Economic Inequality," notable tech investor and Harvard PhD Paul Graham states the following:

"Indeed, a good number are merely being sloppy by speaking of decreasing economic inequality when what they mean is decreasing poverty. But this is a situation where it would be good to be precise about what we want. Poverty and economic inequality are not identical. When the city is turning off your water because you can't pay the bill, it doesn't make any difference what Larry Page's net worth is compared to yours. He might only be a few times richer than you, and it would still be just as much of a problem that your water was getting turned off."

How, then, do we solve poverty? The most obvious answer is with better education for everyone; something I've been a vocal proponent of for quite some time. Giving every deserving citizen a top-tier education will surely put us on the right track as a country in combating--and alleviating--poverty. But will universal education bring us a more uniform measure of economic wellbeing? Certainly not! By granting all children in America the same, top-notch education, economic inequality will grow, not shrink. How is this possible? Think about it rationally for a minute: if 75 million school-aged children were to receive the same level of education as Max Levchin or Peter Thiel, you can bet any number of macro-stats that more than a few of them would become the next mavens of their economic generation. If even a handful of these students found happiness working as mid-level corporate directors for their careers instead of advancing global infrastructure as successful business tycoons, you've just successfully widened the gap of economic inequality, even though everyone found positive benefit.

It should be America's job not to tell you how high to build your house; it should be to make sure your foundation is as strong as it could ever be.
